>> Zac Gordon: Stepping
back from this a moment.
In 2015,
in December, Matt Mullenweg who is kind
of a co-founder of WordPress, he was one
of the two people along with Mike Little
who fought it back in its early days.
He gave his first homework
assignment ever, and
every year he gives a talk on the state of
WordPress and what's latest and greatest,
what's coming, what's new, all of these.
And at the end of 2015,
he gave his first homework assignment,
which was learn JavaScript deeply.
Now on a personal note,
I haven't shared much about myself.
But my background is in education and
web development, so
I've taught high school, and college,
and code schools, and online schools.
And now I'm here at Frontend Masters!
It was funny because I
was let go from a job,
the exact same week that he said this.
Like, we don't wanna
teach WordPress anymore.
So I'm like, what am I gonna do?
And I show up at this talk and
he's like, go learn JavaScript deeply.
Everybody, go learn it.
And so, I was like, okay,
I'll teaching JavaScript deeply now and
I have ever since I was sitting
in the audience for this.
So that's kind of a little
bit just about me and
what my focus has been on since then.
I started a project called The JavaScript
for WordPress Master Course.
And it's gone through different revisions.
I was planning to just take four months,
teach JavaScript from start to finish and
then take off for the rest of the year.
And now a year and a half later,
I'm halfway done with the project because
JavaScript from start to finish is a lot.
>> Zac Gordon: The next year at the next
state of WordPress he said the same
thing again, go learn JavaScript deeply.
And the reason for
this is becoming more and more apparent.
He also pointed out that 30% at that
point of WordPress is in JavaScript,
its core code.
So to contribute to parts of it,
you need to know it.
But there's also more stuff going on since
then, so that customizer I showed you,
it's getting better and better, there
are experiments on how to do more and
more with it.
As well as widgets and hooks in
WordPress are huge, huge part of it but
you've had to build all of them in PHP.
So there are some projects now.
The way new features in Core and WordPress
work is they launch it as a plugin first,
get all th traction,
get all the testing done.
Then it becomes a featured plugin, and
then eventually [COUGH] rolled into Core.
So these are the projects
that I'm mentioning here,
have a lot of work behind them [COUGH] and
people going into them.
But they're not in core yet, so
this is just kind of what's up and coming.
And then the biggest one is Gutenberg, and
Gutenberg is a rebuild of
the entire editor page.
So when you go to add a post or
add a page, it's going to be
rebuilding that as a single page web
app design with the ability to kind of
drag some things around, have blocks of
content instead of just one content field.
And in order to build it or work with it,
you're going to have to know JavaScript.
And there are some debates right now.
It's, I wouldn't say too out of control,
but there is a lot of influence on people
saying, we should build these new things
in React because Calypso's built in React.
And we have all these developers being
paid to work on a WordPress project that's
already in React.
But then you have so
many of the average developers out there,
who've really fallen in love with Vue.
And, they're like, no Vue's easier and
we should use Vue instead.
And so there's a lot of discussion
going into this right now.
And they even have open chats every week,
and
you could join them if you wanted to and
take part of the discussion.
So, this is kind of some of
the stuff that's coming up in Core.
And the point being, a year from now,
these thing will be even further along.
And to edit and work with any of them, in
the past you could use just a little bit
of PHP, now you're really gonna
need to understand your JavaScript.
And in the real world,
we're seeing this as well, so plugins,
building out more API support.
So if you have a contact form, it's not
going to work with an API powered site,
unless you do some extra
work behind the scenes.
We're also seeing more JS driven themes.
It's still at this point not always the
smartest idea to build your entire theme
in JavaScript because you lose out all the
ability of WordPress like feeding you data
and loading stuff on the page.
And we will even see some stuff today
on where it's a good approach to, hey,
let's just do this with PHP, but we'll
take over everything else with JavaScript
cuz there are still some cases with that.
So lets say JS driven,
and then one of the most exciting is
completely decoupled environments.
So, you could build your React, or
Angular, or Vue app, and then just tie
into the APN on the back-end, and
never have to touch WordPress.
And with authentication,
you don't actually have to log in.
Although I will say that, where it's
at right now, even decoupled projects,
most people are saying if I have a client
that needs to regularly edit content,
let's let them log in to
WordPress normally to do that.
But we want to build our apps in Angular,
or in JavaScript, or in Vue right now,
so we're going to build it that
way cuz that's the future and
we'll just plugin to the back-end with
the API and they can go and edit that way.
So this is kind of the current
landscape of JavaScript and WordPress.
And what's fascinating to me, and
having all of you here is that this
is the very first time, I think,
in WordPress's history where we're seeing
people with JavaScript experience or
dev experience in mass beginning to look
at the software in a completely different
way than the average person who just
knows some PHP and can build a theme.
They're not coming in going,
how do I set up my web pack build, and
how do I build a decoupled project and tie
into an API, because these skills are not
standard, but in a lot of education
now with web development,
this is stuff being taught
kind of as the go-to way.
So, there is discussion on
what's going to come next.
I have some opinions.
It hasn't really been announced,
so I'll hold them off.
But possibly even by the time this airs or
definitely within the next year or so.
We'll probably see just
like backbone was added and
jQuery was added at a certain time.
We'll probably see Vue or
React added to Word Press Core itself and
the core components being built with that,
which is going to allow a lot of other
things to happen easier.
>> Zac Gordon: So, just to note and
to remind to kind of wrap this up
that JavaScript is becoming more and
more integrated and more and
more important to WordPress.
So having these skills is essential.
And it's a buzz in the community and
has been for
a little while of people
trying to learn more.
So I want to push again, if you have
these skills on the JavaScript end,
jump into doing more of WordPress,
cuz there's a lot of folks that could
use your expertise, and clients that
could use your skills, too, right?